[TASK] Add in-depth notes for migration (#403)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Guide-HowToDocument: Documentation/WritingDocForExtension/Migrate.rst

:file:`Documentation/guides.xml` from the information contained in your
:file:`Documentation/Settings.cfg`.

`Docker <https://docs.docker.com/install/>`__ (or a drop-in replacement like
`Podman <https://podman.io>`__) needs to be installed on your
operating system for the tool to work:

..  tabs::

    ..  group-tab:: Docker

        ..  code-block:: bash

            docker run --rm --pull always \
              -v $(pwd):/project \
              -it ghcr.io/typo3-documentation/render-guides:latest \
              migrate Documentation

    .. group-tab:: Podman

        ..  code-block:: bash

            podman run --rm --pull always \
              -v $(pwd):/project \
              -it ghcr.io/typo3-documentation/render-guides:latest \
              migrate Documentation

The last parameter (:bash:`Documentation`) is the name of the directory, where your

> :file:`Settings.cfg` is currently placed in.

Reviewer: We should also give a hint to the users about the output: Either we should add that the output is informational and does mostly not shows errors. Or we should remove the output of non-converted configurations completely.

Author: Added a note.

Try out the rendering locally
=============================

Use our Docker container to render your documentation locally. Read more about
:ref:`local rendering <rendering-docs>`.

..  _migrate-detailed-steps:

Further steps to adapt to the new rendering
===========================================

You should perform the following tasks to conclude the migration to the
new rendering tool:

1. Improve your documentation to render without warning
-------------------------------------------------------

Rendering your documentation should not yield any warnings or errors.

If you get error messages, often they refer to wrong indentation, missing

> interlinks, orphaned files or outdated ReST-identifiers.

Reviewer: please link "interlinks" to the according section, as users may not know what this is.

And: "ReST identifiers" without a dash.

Author: Done. Linked to `settings-guides-interlink-mapping` - this is a stub though. Or do you know of another place where "Interlinks" are described and we should link to instead?

Reviewer 2: Good enough for now, we can improve it in a follow up

If you are unable to address a warning/error with changes in your documentation

> and if you believe you found a bug in the new PHP-based rendering, please open

Reviewer: I suggest to ask in the documentation channel first.

Author: Added a note (like on `Documentation/GeneralConventions/ContentStyleGuide.rst`).

an `Issue on GitHub <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/render-guides/issues>`__.

2. Remove outdated files
-----------------------------------

After you have created the :file:`guides.xml` file, you can remove the old
:file:`Settings.cfg` file.

You can also delete the files :file:`genindex.rst` which was previously used

> to generate an index.

Reviewer: The reference in the Documentation/Index.rst file should then also removed.

Author: That's mentioned later on.

Author: It's not twice.

1: Remove genindex.rst file
2: Remove genindex reference

That's two different tasks

> The :file:`screenshots.json` is also no longer evaluated, so you can remove

Reviewer: That is another thing, that has nothing to do with the switch. The file configured a screenshot tool which is not running anymore with TYPO3 v12. And I doubt that many users use it in their extension. AFAIK only EXT:news used it.

Author: But that still makes this paragraph applicable then, we could still mention it for a "new render spring cleaning"?

Reviewer 2: I think the screenshots.json was never wide spread. I would ommit mentioning it

Reviewer: Then the sentence should be adjusted. The screenshots.json has nothing to do with the docs rendering ("also no longer evaluated" - this is not true, if you are on v11 and use the testing framework v7 to create your screenshots -> this works).

Author: It's removed now

that optional file.

3. Adapt :file:`Includes.rst.txt`
---------------------------------

The main documentation directory can contain a file :file:`Includes.rst.txt`
to include any fixed text, which will be placed on every page of your rendered
documentation.

Previously it was also used to define a list of utilized directives/roles.

> You can either safely remove that file, or add your fixed text to it.

Reviewer: Hint, that when removing the file all references must also be dropped.

Author: added a note

Most official documentation uses this as the stub of the file:

..  code-block:: text

>     :caption: /Documentation/Includes.rst.txt

Reviewer: Either use `Documentation/Includes.rst.txt` or `EXT:my_extension/Documentation/Includes.rst.txt`

Author: Changed.

    ..  You can put central messages to display on all pages here

4. Remove the entry `genindex` from :file:`Index.rst` (Index/Glossary)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

> If you previously had a :file:`genindex.rst` file, this optional index

Author: I'd like to make it a specific point to explain what it's for; this is about removing the Index.rst entries and not the file itself

(or glossary) was rendered as a page through an entry in the file :file:`Index.rst`
like this:

..  code-block:: text
    :caption: /Documentation/Index.rst
    :emphasize-lines: 17

    **Table of Contents:**

    .. toctree::
       :maxdepth: 2
       :titlesonly:

       Introduction/Index
       Installation/Index
       Details/Index

    .. Meta Menu

    .. toctree::
       :hidden:

       Sitemap
       genindex

Remove the entry `genindex` from the list.

..  hint::

    See :ref:`migrate-glossary` for details about the future of the
    index (glossary) generation.

5. Prevent code-snippets with :file:`.rst` extension
----------------------------------------------------

> All files ending in :file:`.rst` will be interpreted by the new rendering,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All files with the extension :file:`.rst` will be interpreted by the new rendering,
```

and every file that is just a code snippet placed in an external file
should be renamed to use a :file:`.rst.txt` extension instead.

Recommendations
===============

The following list is not a requirement to utilize the new rendering, but
follows "best practice" to make the most of your documentation project.

..  _migrate-to-makefile:

Add a :file:`Makefile` to your project
--------------------------------------

> A :file:`Makefile` is a simple command line runner configuration file, which requires

Reviewer: Please hint: Only on Unix-based operating systems available.

Author: Added.

the utility `GNU make <https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html>`_
to be available on your Operating System.

This allows you to perform shortcuts to render your documentation instead
of typing a long :bash:`docker run...` or :bash:`podman run...` command:

..  code-block:: shell

    make docs

For inspiration, check out the :file:`Makefile` of the main PHP-based rendering
repository:

> https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/render-guides/blob/main/Makefile

Reviewer: This is too big and the most tasks are not necessary and might confuse users. I suggest to remove this reference.

Author: Hm, I do think this is a very nice example of a complex but useful Makefile, and I explicitly said "for inspiration"? I'd like to keep this.

Reviewer 2: I would agree to keep it, it is just for inspiration

Reviewer: This is about docs rendering not what you can do with a Makefile.

Reviewer 2: This is simply an inspiration what else you can do with the tool

A small example :file:`Makefile`:

..  literalinclude:: _Makefile
    :caption: /Makefile

..  _migrate-to-testing-workflow:

Activate automatic testing in your project
------------------------------------------

It is recommended to use an automatic workflow on GitHub Or Gitlab to
ensure the extension's documentation renders without warnings.

An example workflow on GitHub would be established via this file in
:file:`.github/actions/documentation.yml`:

> ..  code-block:: yaml

Reviewer: Please move it to a separate file and use literalinclude. This way, syntax highlighting is available in the IDE and errors might be spotted better.

Author: Done

    :caption: .github/actions/documentation.yml

    name: Test documentation

    on: [ push, pull_request ]

    jobs:
      tests:
        name: Render documentation
        runs-on: ubuntu-latest
        steps:
          - name: Checkout
            uses: actions/checkout@v4

          - name: Test if the documentation will render without warnings
            run: |
              mkdir -p Documentation-GENERATED-temp \
              && docker run --rm --pull always -v $(pwd):/project \
                 ghcr.io/typo3-documentation/render-guides:latest --config=Documentation --no-progress --fail-on-log

This creates a workflow entry `Test documentation`, so that on every push to your
repository, and every pull request, the rendering is executed. A commit will then

> be rejected, if the rendering fails.

Reviewer: not rejected, but marked as failed.

Author: Reworded.

The last parameter (:bash:`Documentation`) is the name of the directory, where your
:file:`Settings.cfg` is currently placed in.

After the migration is performed, you will see output about which settings were
converted, if some old settings were discarded, or errors occurred.

Try out the rendering locally
=============================

Use our Docker container to render your documentation locally. Read more about
:ref:`local rendering <rendering-docs>`.

..  _migrate-detailed-steps:

Further steps to adapt to the new rendering
===========================================

You should perform the following tasks to conclude the migration to the
new rendering tool:

..  rst-class:: bignums

1.  Improve your documentation to render without warning

    Rendering your documentation should not yield any warnings or errors.

    If you get error messages, often they refer to wrong indentation, missing
    :ref:`interlinks <settings-guides-interlink-mapping>`, orphaned files or
    outdated ReST identifiers.

    If you are unable to address a warning/error with changes in your documentation
    feel free to ask in Slack channel #typo3-documentation (see :ref:`how-to-get-help`).

>     If you believe you found a specific bug in the new PHP-based rendering, please open

Reviewer: I would avoid "new" as it tends to stay there for a longer time. Just "in the PHP-based rendering" is sufficient.

Author: I agree; I only left "new" rendering in the top note, and removed it for other occurences.

>     an `Issue on GitHub <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/render-guides/issues>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    an `issue on GitHub <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/render-guides/issues>`__.
```

2.  Remove outdated files

>     After you have created the :file:`guides.xml` file, you can remove the old

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    After the :file:`guides.xml` file has been created, you can remove the old
```

Mostly, it is generated by the command, not manually by the user.

    :file:`Settings.cfg` file.

>     You can also delete the files :file:`genindex.rst` which was previously used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can also delete the :file:`genindex.rst` file which was previously used
```

    to generate an index.

3.  Adapt :file:`Includes.rst.txt`

    The main documentation directory can contain a file :file:`Includes.rst.txt`
    to include any fixed text, which will be placed on every page of your rendered
    documentation.

>     Previously it was also used to define a list of utilized directives/roles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Previously, it was also used to define a list of utilized directives/roles.
```

    You can either remove that file, or add your fixed text to it. If you remove
    the file, remember to also remove all references pointing to that file, like:

    ..  code-block:: text
        :caption: Documentation/Index.rst

        ..  include:: /Includes.rst.txt

    Most official documentation uses this as the stub of the file:

    ..  code-block:: text
        :caption: Documentation/Includes.rst.txt

        ..  You can put central messages to display on all pages here

4.  Remove the entry `genindex` from :file:`Index.rst` (Index/Glossary)

    If you previously had a :file:`genindex.rst` file, this optional index
    (or glossary) was rendered as a page through an entry in the file :file:`Index.rst`
    like this:

>     ..  code-block:: text

Reviewer: I would like to see here a diff instead of a text. This makes clearer which file to remove at which position.

Author: How would you format a diff? I just added a "-" now in front of it and changed "code-block::" to "diff". Doesn't look that much different though. The line emphasize should highlight the removal already though:

<img width="768" alt="Screenshot 2024-03-13 at 09 21 46" src="https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Guide-HowToDocument/assets/273326/1556e5b3-2e7b-4fe7-9324-15c89ac5e56c">

Reviewer: Remove the emphasize-lines. Add the `-` in the first column and indent all other lines by one column to the right

Author: Ack, done!

        :caption: Documentation/Index.rst
        :emphasize-lines: 17

        **Table of Contents:**

        .. toctree::
           :maxdepth: 2
           :titlesonly:

           Introduction/Index
           Installation/Index
           Details/Index

        .. Meta Menu

        .. toctree::
           :hidden:

           Sitemap
           genindex

    Remove the entry `genindex` from the list.

    ..  hint::

        See :ref:`migrate-glossary` for details about the future of the
        index (glossary) generation.

> 5.  Prevent code snippets with :file:`.rst` extension

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5.  Avoid code snippets with :file:`.rst` extension
```

"Prevent" is more like "verhindern", "avoid" more "vermeiden".

>     All files with the extension :file:`.rst` will be interpreted by the new rendering,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    All files with the extension :file:`.rst` will be interpreted by the PHP-based rendering,
```

Activate automatic testing in your project
------------------------------------------

It is recommended to use an automatic workflow on GitHub Or GitLab to
ensure the extension's documentation renders without warnings.

An example workflow on GitHub would be established via this file in
:file:`.github/actions/documentation.yml`:

..  literalinclude:: _documentation.yml
    :caption: .github/actions/documentation.yml

This creates a workflow entry `Test documentation`, so that on every push to your
repository, and every pull request, the rendering is executed. A commit will then
not be possible, if the rendering fails. The workflow run will be marked with an error,
and shown on pull requests.

..  _migrate-glossary:

To be discussed: Index generation (glossary)
============================================

The Sphinx rendering allowed to utilize a syntax like the following to
add indexes to your documentation:

..  code-block::
    :caption: Documentation/Index.rst

    ..  index::
        XLIFF; Files
        File; XLIFF

The automatically generated file :file:`genindex.html` would show a
two-column layout of all indexes, with the pages that they were used on.

> The new PHP-based rendering does not (yet) support this indexing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PHP-based rendering does not (yet) support this indexing.
```
